README.md, before:

# LEGOLAS 🧝‍♀️🏹
A fast and accurate machine learning model built on PyTorch for predicting protein chemical shifts from PDB structures and molecular dynamics trajectories. This model is designed to be run on either CPUs or GPUs.

![Model Architecture](images/model_architecture.png "Model Architecture")

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Citation](#citation)

## Installation
1. Clone the repository using `--recursive` to include the required submodule:
```bash
 git clone --recursive https://github.com/roitberg-group/legolas.git
 cd legolas
```
2. Set up a conda environment:
Use the provided legolas_env.yaml file to create the conda environment:
```bash
conda env create -n legolas -f legolas_env.yaml
conda activate legolas
```
Versions when installing using conda:

- python 3.10
- cuda 11.8
- pytorch 2.5.1

3. Install TorchANI:

**Within `external/internal-legolas-aev`:**

LEGOLAS is most efficient when run using the torchani compiled cuAEV extension, but it is not required.

You have two options, depending on whether you want to install the torchani compiled extensions. To install torchani with no compiled extensions run:

```bash
pip install --no-deps -v .
```

To install torchani with the cuAEV compiled extension run instead:

```bash
# Use 'ext-all-sms' instead of 'ext' if you want to build for all possible GPUs
pip install --config-settings=--global-option=ext --no-build-isolation --no-deps -v .
```

In both cases you can add the editable, `-e`, flag after the verbose, `-v`,
flag if you want an editable install (for developers). The `-v` flag can of
course be omitted, but it is sometimes handy to have some extra information
about the installation process.

## Usage

### To run LEGOLAS, use the following command:
```bash
# atypes = HA, H, CA, CB, C, N
python legolas.py {coordinates_file(s)} [-b {BATCH_SIZE}] [-atype {INTERESTED_ATYPES}] [-t {TOPOLOGY}] [-o {OUTPUT_FILETYPE}]
```

### Examples:
```bash
# All atom types:
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH

# Specfy atom types:
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH -atype H,C,N

# Run on molecular dynamics trajectory:
python legolas.py data/{trajectory_file}.nc -t data/{topology_file}.parm7

# Specify output file type ("csv", "parquet", "pdbcs", "all", default=all)
# pdbcs output file type is only available for PDB inputs (not trajectories)
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH -o csv,pdbcs
```

### Expected `.csv` Output
| Column Name          | Description |
|-----------------------|-------------|
| `ATOM_TYPE`           | Atom type: N, CA, CB, C, HA, H |
| `SEQ_ID`              | Residue sequence number |
| `RES_TYPE`            | Three-letter code for the 20 standard amino acids |
| `CHEMICAL_SHIFT`      | Predicted chemical shift (average over 5 models) |
| `CHEMICAL_SHIFT_STD`  | Standard deviation across 5 models (lower std = higher confidence)

## Contributing

If you find a bug or have some feature request, please feel free to open an issue on GitHub or send us a pull request.

## License
This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Citation

Please cite the following paper if you use LEGOLAS:

Mikayla Y. Darrows, Dimuthu Kodituwakku, Jinze Xue, Ignacio Pickering, Nicholas S. Terrel, Adrian E. Roitberg. LEGOLAS: a Machine Learning method for rapid and accurate predictions of protein NMR chemical shifts.


J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025, 21, 8, 4266–4275


https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5c00026

Commit message:

Update installation instructions (internal legolas aev no longer needed)

README.md, after:

# LEGOLAS 🧝‍♀️🏹

A fast and accurate machine learning model built on PyTorch for predicting protein
chemical shifts from PDB structures and molecular dynamics trajectories. This model is
designed to be run on either CPUs or GPUs.

![Model Architecture](images/model_architecture.png "Model Architecture")

## Table of Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Citation](#citation)

## Installation

1. Clone the repository using `--recursive` to include the required submodule:
```bash
 git clone --recursive https://github.com/roitberg-group/legolas.git
 cd legolas
```
2. Set up a conda environment:
Use the provided legolas_env.yaml file to create the conda environment:
```bash
conda env create -n legolas -f legolas_env.yaml
conda activate legolas
```
3. Install the TorchANI 2.0 compiled extensions. LEGOLAS is most efficient when doing
   this but it is not required.

```bash
# legolas_env installs torchani, which provides the "ani" cli interface
ani build-extensions
```

Versions when installing using conda:

- python 3.10
- cuda 11.8
- pytorch 2.5.1

## Usage

### To run LEGOLAS, use the following command:

```bash
# atypes = HA, H, CA, CB, C, N
python legolas.py <COORDINATES_FILE(S)> [-b BATCH_SIZE] [-atype REQUESTED_ATYPES] [-t TOPOLOGY] [-o OUTPUT_FILETYPE]
```

### Examples:

```bash
# All atom types:
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH

# Specfy atom types:
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH -atype H,C,N

# Run on molecular dynamics trajectory:
python legolas.py data/{trajectory_file}.nc -t data/{topology_file}.parm7

# Specify output file type ("csv", "parquet", "pdbcs", "all", default=all)
# pdbcs output file type is only available for PDB inputs (not trajectories)
python legolas.py data/A001_1KF3A.pdbH -o csv,pdbcs
```

### Expected `.csv` Output

| Column Name          | Description |
|-----------------------|-------------|
| `ATOM_TYPE`           | Atom type: N, CA, CB, C, HA, H |
| `SEQ_ID`              | Residue sequence number |
| `RES_TYPE`            | Three-letter code for the 20 standard amino acids |
| `CHEMICAL_SHIFT`      | Predicted chemical shift (average over 5 models) |
| `CHEMICAL_SHIFT_STD`  | Standard deviation across 5 models (lower std = higher confidence)

## Contributing

If you find a bug or have some feature request, please feel free to open an issue on GitHub or send us a pull request.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Citation

Please cite the following paper if you use LEGOLAS:

Mikayla Y. Darrows, Dimuthu Kodituwakku, Jinze Xue, Ignacio Pickering, Nicholas S.
Terrel, Adrian E. Roitberg. LEGOLAS: a Machine Learning method for rapid and accurate
predictions of protein NMR chemical shifts.


J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025, 21, 8, 4266–4275


https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5c00026
